The CAIRSS Community Day will be held on the Sunshine Coast (Queensland) from the 30th November - 1st December 2009.  An event to meet with other CAIRSS repository managers and discuss topics of interest to the community. The  program  is designed to cater to both Repository Managers and Repository Technical Officers. CAIRSS Community Function Date:  Monday 30th November 2009. Time:  6pm-8pm. Venue :  Mooloolaba Surf Club  Function Room (upstairs). The Esplanade , Mooloolaba Queensland.  (07) 5444 1300 About:  An opportunity to meet repository colleagues from all CAIRSS institutions and informally discuss topics of interest. Finger food and beverages will be provided. CAIRSS Community Day Date:  Tuesday 1st December 2009. Time:  8:30am-5pm. Venue:  Innovation Centre ,  University of the Sunshine Coast . Sippy Downs Drive, Sippy Downs, Queensland. Campus Map About:  The  program  is designed to cater to both Repository Managers and Repository Technical Officers.  Note: A charter bus will be organised to transport delegates from Mooloolaba accommodation to and from the University for the CAIRSS Community Day on the 1st December. Registration:  2 delegates from each CAUL institution are invited to attend. Please submit a  registration form  to  cairss@caul.edu.au Travel Information Jetstar  and  Virgin Blue  fly direct from Melbourne and Sydney to Sunshine Coast Airport. Most other areas fly direct to Brisbane Airport where you have the option to take the Airport Shuttle ( SunAir ) direct to the Sunshine Coast (80min), or hire a car and drive up (80min). Accommodation Information The best place to stay is in Mooloolaba near the ocean, within walking distance to the Surf Club and be within walking distance to where the charter bus to the University will depart from. Mantra Mooloolaba Beach Club Mooloolaba (If you mention  ‘ CAIRSS ’  when you book Beach Club Mooloolaba, they can do an offer on a 2 night stay for $270) . CAIRSS Contact details Phone:  07 5430 2823 Mobile:  0419658448 Email:  cairss@caul.edu.au Other useful details for visiting the Sunshine Coast Suncoast Cabs   131 008 Tourism Sunshine Coast