Assessment details Description Marks out of Wtg(%) Due date 5 Web-postings and summary 100 20 31 August 2009 Essay 100 40 19 October 2009 Examination 100 40 Examination period Notes This assessment is aligned with Objectives 1, 3 and 5. This assessment is aligned with Objectives 1, 3 and 4. Students will be advised of the examination date when the timetable has been finalised. This assessment is aligned with Objectives 1, 3 and 4. Submission details For this course you are required to submit each assignment attached inside the standard assignment folder on which is included:  full name and address and student number name of course assignment number correct assignment sticker. Please ensure that all pages are securely fastened together, numbered, and each page should have your name on it. All assignments should be forwarded to: Distance and e-Learning Centre University of Southern Queensland TOOWOOMBA QLD 4350 AUSTRALIA Web-postings and summary Description Marks out of Wtg(%) Due date 5 web-postings and summary 100 20 31 August 2009 Part 1  Make a posting to the discussion forum set up for this assessment item on the course  StudyDesk  on USQ Connect  at the end of each week from weeks 2 – 5. This should be a piece of about  two paragraphs length that deals with one of three options : An outline of the life and work of one performer that you have covered in the module for the week A definition and example of one major genre or piece type that you have covered in the module set for the week A response to one of the music pieces you have heard during class or on the Covach textbook support website < http://www2.wwnorton.com/college/music/rockhistory/welcome.htm > that you have covered in the module set for the week. Keep a personal record of all the pieces that you post on the  StudyDesk . Please take time to read the responses logged by other students in the class  –  you might like to interact with the responses and start up an online conversation. Part 2  At the end of week 5, choose the best of your four pieces and expand it into a 750 – 800 word short essay, complete with an introduction, body and brief conclusion. Show the references you have used through: in-text referencing using the Harvard system a list of references organised according to the Harvard system with ten relevant sources.  These may be: your textbook and anthology of scores books in hard copy from the USQ library collection ebrary books from the USQ database collection journal references from the USQ databases Relevant articles from  Grove music online  (Wikipedia is not an acceptable reference source.) The weighting of the various elements in the assignment is as follows:  clear introduction 10% interesting and coherent body of essay 50% clear and succinct conclusion 10% correct use of in text referencing 10 % relevant and correctly organised bibliography 20%. Essay Description Marks out of Wtg(%) Due date Essay 2000 words 100 40 19 October 2009 Select one progressive or  ‘ art ’  rock band of the 1970s. Discuss their development, their musical characteristics and make some detailed commentary on two tracks. How have music arrangers and production engineers contributed to the finished product on commercially released recordings? Is their work sufficiently acknowledged in the creation of  ‘ band myths ’ ? In your essay discuss two specific albums. Select a solo artist or band from the period 1970-2000. Outline how this artist or group has advanced the development of rock music with supporting, relevant musical evidence. Mainstream trends in rock and popular music frequently trigger reactions in underground or fringe movements, which in turn become mainstream. Discuss this phenomenon in relation to two bands active during the 1990s. Musical trends in rock music have become increasingly varied during the period from 1970 to the present, yet some genres remain recognisably similar over many years. Based on your observations of music since the turn of the 21st century, how is popular music likely to develop further? Refer to specific songs in your reflection. How are the stylistic trends of popular music covered in this course, reflected in the popular music of your home country? Are there any elements in the music that demonstrate local flavour and identify? (This question is designed especially for students originating outside Australia, the US, or Britain.)