USQ Core Desktop Service L e vel Agreement Document Purpose The purpose of this service level agreement is to establish a clear baseline of service expectation and client responsibility between University of Southern Queensland and the Division of ICT Services.   Services provided by the Division of ICT Services that are not referenced within this SLA will be covered by either Global SLA ’ s or Product and Services SLA ’ s where applicable. Description of Services This service level agreement covers: Support for the staff desktop and notebook computing environments Computer lab support services Lecture theatre support services Audio Visual support service Document Information Version V0.1 Release Date Release Status Draft Author(s) Owner Print Date Approved By Restriction Internal Doc. Cat. Table Client Type of Document Service Level Agreement Document Number Electronic Location and Filename Hardcopy Location Service Delivery Section Version Control Version Date Author(s) Summary of Changes Error Advisory To the Reader: If you encounter any inaccuracies or printing faults in this document please contact the Owner (see Document Information section, above) as soon as possible. The Owner will then initiate the required modifications. If you are unable to contact the Owner, contact that person ’ s Manager or Supervisor.  Thank you for helping the Division of ICT Services maintain quality documentation. Service Level Agreement Introduction This document details the service levels for each of the support services provided under this SLA as detailed in the schedules attached. Service Provider Division of ICT Services Support Hours & Contact Details Technical support is available Monday to Friday 8am-5pm at the Toowoomba, campus.  Support requests can be logged with the ICT Service Desk by phone EXT 1900 (07 4631 1900) during the hours 8am – 5pm Monday to Friday. Support  requests can be logged at any time by e-mail to ICT Service Desk or via the web at  http://www.usq.edu.au/ict/staff/request  then clicking on the Heat Self Service link. Calls logged via the Service Desk will ensure problem escalation in event of service difficulty. Daemon Positions The Division of ICT Services, on request, will provide out of hours lab support during Semesters 1 and 2 through a Student Daemon program.  This program provides multiple Daemon positions on a casual basis occupied by third year students with an aptitude for IT.  Daemon support will consist of: Checking labs prior to use. Replacing faulty peripheral equipment, such as keyboards, mice. Fixing printer paper jams. Rebuilding images. Schedule of Services Each  Faculty and designated Operation Units will have a Schedule of Services which details specified desktop support for their areas. The services specified in these schedules are provided for the primary physical location (ie Toowoomba campus) unless stipulated as a variation in the attachments.    Support services at remote locations and faculties are covered under the respective instit ution or campus SLA (ie Wide Bay or Springfield campuses). Desktop Computing Environment Computing support for desktop computers, notebook computers, printers and other peripheral devices that rely on the Windows, Macintosh and Linux operating systems. Installation of new computers along with standard software configuration, printer installations and network connectivity. Problem diagnosis and resolution of standard hardware,  ICT Standard Operating System (SOE) , network and standard application software faults. Reconfiguration of network connectivity for relocated computer equipment (excludes physical relocation of equipment). For peripherals that are out of warranty and not covered by a service contract ICT will source quotes from vendors for repairs on behalf of and subject to the approval of the Faculty or Operational Unit. Current documentation on image definitions, lab locations and numbers, supported software is available at  http://usqindex.usq.edu.au/sites/ictindex/sladocs/default.aspx Incident Response Times, Resolution Times and Escalations When an incident occurs the following response times apply.  Internal Priorities set by Service Desk Staff (no escalation path) Priority Used for Response/Resolution 0 First Point of Contact Immediate C Critical Immediate External   Priorities, set by Service Desk staff or by clients logging jobs (follows escalation path) Priority Response Resolution 1  Urgent 30 mins 4 hrs 2  High 1 hr 8 hrs 3  Standard 4 hrs 2 days 4  Low 1 day 5 days Response is defined as  “ the time allowed to respond to the incident ” . Resolution is defined as the  “ client has confirmed that the incident has been resolved to their satisfaction ” . The following definitions and matrix will be used to decide the priority. Deciding the Priority Impact Description 1  Whole organization, site or multiple site, multiple groups of users affected; critical business process interrupted; or system wide outages to key systems (eg email). 2  Group of users, PVC, DVC or member of VC ’ s office staff, non-critical business system. 3  User(s) affected (other than VC ’ s, DVC ’ s or PVC ’ s office). 4 One user affected (other than VC ’ s, DVC ’ s or PVC ’ s office). Urgency Standard 1  Process stopped; user(s) cannot work 2  Process affected; user(s) cannot use certain functions 3  Process not affected; user cannot use certain functions 4 Process not affected; change request, new/extra/optimized function Priority Ratings Matrix Impact 4 3 2 1 4 Low (4) Low (4) Standard (3) Standard (3) U rgency 3 Standard (3) Standard (3) High (2) High (2) 2 High (2) High (2) Urgent (1) Urgent (1) 1 High (2) High (2) Urgent (1) Urgent (1) (*) Represents the priority number Escalation Target Time Frames L evel 1 Urgent and Level 2 High When 65% of the agreed time for resolution has elapsed and the request is unresolved, the Service Delivery Co-ordinator will consult with the assigned solver on progress. When 85% of such time has elapsed and the request remains unresolved, the Service Delivery Co-ordinator will consult with the Line Manager of the assigned solver. When 100% of such time has elapsed and the request remains unresolved, the Service Delivery Co-ordinator will consult with the respective Principal Manager. When 115% of such time has elapsed and the request remains unresolved, the Service Delivery Co-ordinator will consult with the Chief Technology Officer. Level 3 Standard and Level 4 Low When 70% of the agreed time for resolution has elapsed and the request is unresolved, the Service Delivery Co-ordinator will consult with the assigned solver on progress. When 90% of such time has elapsed and the request remains unresolved, the Service Delivery Co-ordinator will consult with the Line Manager of the assigned solver. When 100% of such time has elapsed and the request remains unresolved, the Service Delivery Co-ordinator will consult with the respective Principal Manager. When 115% of such time has elapsed and the request remains unresolved, the Service Delivery Co-ordinator will consult with the Chief Technology Officer. Escalation Notification Paths Escalation Number Assigned Solver  Line Manager  Principal Manager  Chief Technology Officer 1 Yes No No No 2 Yes Yes No No 3 Yes Yes Yes No 4 Yes Yes Yes Yes Table 1: HEAT Escalation Paths Moves, Adds and Changes Moves, adds and changes using existing infrastructure will be at nil cost. Where new cabling or data outlets are required these will be billed on a cost recovery basis.  New cabling and infrastructure implementation times will be negotiated. Telephones Analogue handsets will be provided at nil cost.  Additional digital handsets will be provided on a cost recovery basis. Reporting Structures Where a Senior ICT Support Officer is physically located within a Faculty, the Senior Support Officer will have a dotted line reporting structure to the designated Faculty contact.   All HR functions associated with ICT Support Staff located in Faculties are the responsibility of the designated  ICT Service Delivery Coordinator. Where a Faculty or Operational Unit does not have an ICT Senior Support Officer physically located in their area, the Service Delivery Co-ordinator will have a dotted line reporting structure to the designated Faculty or Operational Unit contact. Critical Service Dependencies The successful operation of this service level agreement depends on effective communication processes between the Faculty or Operational Unit and ICT staff.  Where ICT Support Staff are located within a Faculty or Operational Unit  it is expected they will be included in IT planning meetings and processes to ensure they are kept informed of planned changes and are available to contribute expert technical input. Staff involved in any projects or project planning which will ultimately involve ICT services such as Audio Visual installation, network and data points, computing hardware, etc, are to keep the division informed as early as possible and updated on a regular basis, so as to allow sufficient time for consultation, design and procurement, and the adequate provisioning of staff and other resources. Desktop Refresh Program Desktop computers will be repl aced every 4 years and notebooks every 3 years.  The desktop and notebook fleet will be maintained by the Division of ICT Services.  The cost of additional desktop or notebook computers will initially be the responsibility of the Faculty or Operational Unit.  Once purchased, computers will be added to the existing fleet and become part of the Desktop Refresh Program. Procurement USQ Procurement staff located in the Division of ICT Services will process  all USQ purchase orders for ICT items and provide guidance to USQ procurement staff on the processes for procuring ICT items via other purchase arrangements.  Details of USQ ICT hardware agreements, software agreements and other standing offer arrangements can be found on the ICT web site at  http://www.usq.edu.au/ict/staff/default.htm Software Builds Refer to the Standard Operating Environment Working Party report, available at  http://usqindex.usq.edu.au/C5/minutes/Document%20Library/Standard%20Operating%20Environment%20Working%20Party%20Report%2023aug1.doc Print and Other Consumables The Division of ICT Services will maintain stocks of printing consumables (non-paper stock).  These consumables will be charged back to the Faculty or Operational Unit on a cost recovery basis.  Refer  Printing Support. Print consumables exclude photocopiers but includes Multi Functional Devices (MFD ’ s).  Where MFD ’ s are under a maintenance contract, consumables are covered as part of the contract and are not the responsibility of the Division of ICT Services.  Where MFD ’ s are not under a maintenance contract, consumables will be provided by the Division of ICT Services and charged back to the Faculty or Operational Unit on a cost recovery basis. Note  Where applicable print consumables will be kept onsite. Instructions on installation will be provide if required. Core Services All ICT equipment and infrastructure that is part of  ICT Core Services  and located within the Faculty or Operational Unit is the responsibility of the Division of ICT Services and will be maintained as part of the Recurrent ICT Core Budget. Client Responsibilities Client staff are responsible for the regular backup of data stored on their local computer hard drives. Client staff will contact the ICT Service Desk to obtain support. When reporting faults staff are to provide a detailed description of the problem, including any error messages as well as a detailed description of the impact so that the appropriate priority level can be assigned. When advised of the Heat Call number, client staff are to ensure this is recorded and given on any future reference to the call. If  Daemon support  (see page 2) has been requested, checking of computer laboratory hardware and software will be provided as part of this support, however teaching staff should still check their specific setups prior to scheduled classes.  If Daemon support is not part of the agreement, client teaching staff should check and test computer laboratory software prior to scheduled classes. ICT is not responsible for the physical relocation of computing equipment and furniture as part of any office or building relocation other than the movement of equipment as part of the agreed desktop support and/or desktop refresh programme. Performance Reporting Performance reporting on key performance indicators will be provided to the Faculty or Operational Unit through the designated  ICT Relationship Manager  (see Page  Error: Reference source not found ) at a frequency as detailed in the schedule attached. Quality Assurance The ICT Service Desk will carry out monthly random sampling on call closures.  Annual satisfaction surveys of staff and students will be carried out and data analysed to facilitate continuous improvement of client service. Sampling and survey data will be made available on the Division of ICT website at  http://www.usq.edu.au/ict Disaster Recovery Disaster recovery planning for facilities and equipment is the joint responsibility of the Faculty and the Division of ICT Services. Accepted and Signed Service  Provider ’ s Date  Stamp Here Division of ICT Services University of Southern Queensland Signature Signature Name Title Date  