Your assessment is in accordance with the  course specification  as follows. The following sub-sections provide details regarding the submission and format of assessment items, and the specific requirements and marking criteria for each of the above assessment items. Note  Make sure you read the section on  Doing your assignments  in the Introduction . Assessment details External Mode Students Assessment item Marked out of Weighting Due Discussion contribution 100 15% Throughout CMA Test 1 100 5% 24 August 2009 Essay 100 30% 14 September 2009 Media Journal 100 15% 5 October 2009 Case Study   100 30% 26 October 2009 CMA Test 2 100 5% 2 November 2009 On Campus Mode Students Assessment item Marked out of Weighting Due Workshop Participation 100 10% Throughout Discussion contribution 100 15% Throughout Essay 100 30% 14 September 2009 Media Journal 100 15% 30 October 2009 Case Study 100 30% 26 October 2009 Note  Although the  Discussion contribution  is shown in the  course specification  as not being due until the end of semester, this assessment item requires ongoing engagement with other students throughout the course. You will need to work on this item regularly using the discussion forums and other facilities accessible via USQ StudyDesk . So in fact this is the  first  assessment item that you need to consider! Choice of topics for essay, media journal and case study  During the first few weeks of the course you should consider your choice of topics for the essay, media journal and case study. You are REQUIRED to choose  topics that have a minimum of overlap with each other.  For example, if your essay is mostly about water resources then your case study should not be concerned predominantly with a sustainable water use initiative. Submission details For the essay, media journal and case study there are three methods of submission: For assessment items other than the discussion contribution there are three methods of submission: Electronic submission via the USQ  Electronic Assessment Submission Environment  (EASE) where detailed instructions will be provided. A link to EASE is provided on USQ StudyDesk . The following file formats will be accepted:  Word (2003 only, if using Word 2007, Save As Word 97-2003 so that the file name has a .doc extension) Rich Text Format Open Document File Format (e.g. produced by Open Office Writer).  You are  strongly encouraged  to use electronic submission as it ensure a much faster turnaround, typically only a few days from submission to having your marked assignment returned . Hand delivery of the assessment item into the relevant assignment drop box at one of USQ ’ s three campuses located as follows: at the Distance and e-Learning Centre (Building Y) at the Toowoomba campus adjacent to the front office in Building A at the Fraser Coast campus  outside Building A at the Springfield campus  Mailing of the assessment item to the Distance and e-Learning Centre at the address provided on the Assignment Folder or at < http://www.usq.edu.au/currentstudents/offcampus/assignments/submission.htm >. Except for electronic submissions, assignments must be enclosed in a USQ Assignment Folder, must have the relevant bar-coded label affixed to the folder in the space provided and must be secured by stapling or with a fold-back clip. Bulky plastic folders or binders are discouraged. Students should always keep a copy of assessment items in case the submission goes astray! Submission deadlines are generally set on Mondays to allow you the weekend to work on them. For electronic submission the deadline is normally midnight. For submission by mail the item must be post marked no later than the due date. Every attempt will be made to mark and return assessment items to you within 2 weeks. You will be provided with a breakdown of marks according to the marking scheme for the assessment item together with written comments as appropriate. If you do not understand why you received a certain mark or are unsure of how to improve the result in later work you should consult the course leader or course moderator. The process for appeals is set out in the  USQ Academic Regulations section 5.11 . Extensions The course specification allows for late assignments to be penalised at the rate of 5% per day. However, the following policy shall be applied in this course: Discussion contributions should be done within the timeframe specified so that appropriate interaction can occur between students. In essence, discussion contributions for each module will only be assessed over a four week period starting one week prior to that module according to the  study schedule . For example, discussion contributions for module 2 must be made during weeks 1, 2, 3 or 4. Further details are provided  here . Online CMA tests must normally be done on time. If you miss doing a CMA test please contact the Examiner regarding your situation and you may be offered a chance to do the CMA test at a later time. On all other assignments you may take up to a 2 week extension without approval from the examiner provided that you inform the examiner prior to the due date by email or phone of your intention to do so. Extensions beyond the 2 week limit must then be negotiated with the examiner on the basis of your circumstances including medical, work or family issues. Such requests must be received by the examiner before the expiration of the 2 week extension, again by email or phone. This policy is intended to provide you with a degree of flexibility and acknowledges that students sometimes face difficult circumstances that affect their studies. However, the policy is also intended to instil in you some professional responsibility and common courtesy by requiring you to inform the examiner of your situation. The 5% per day lateness penalty will only be applied in situations where students fail to follow this policy, unless there are extenuating circumstances as recognised by the  USQ Academic Regulations  clause 5.6.3.4. Assessment format Assessment items other than the discussion contribution must be typed and adhere to the following formatting requirements: Have a full page front cover that includes your name and student number, the course number and assignment details including a title for your assignment, e.g.  “ Essay on xxxx ” . Approximately 3 cm margin on both sides (this is the default in Word but in Open Office Writer you may need to widen the default margins). Each page must have a page number in the bottom footer. Normal text should be left aligned with a jagged right margin (do not fully justify). Use 1 ½  line spacing and extra spacing before and after paragraphs (it is suggested that you modify the Normal style in Word or the Default style in Open Office Writer to ensure this applies throughout your document). Normal text is to use a 12 point proportional serif font such as Times Roman or Century Schoolbook . Use headings and sub-headings appropriately and these should use a proportional sans serif font of varying sizes such as Arial (again, best done by using the Heading styles to ensure this applies throughout your document). Short quotes should be written in quotes within the normal flow of text. Longer quotes should be indented on both sides. Use bold for emphasis and italics for certain forms of reference, e.g. legislation. Do not use underlining anywhere. Diagrams, images or graphs should be labelled, e.g. Figure 1: xxxx, and referenced from within the text, e.g.  “ As can be seen in Figure 1  … . ” . Plagiarism and referencing All assessment items must be your own work. Working in consultation with others is a natural part of community development work and is encouraged but the actual writing of assignments must be done by you. Plagiarism will be heavily penalised in accordance with University regulations. Refer to < http://www.usq.edu.au/plagiarism > for further information regarding plagiarism and how to avoid it. Another useful website is < http://www.lib.unimelb.edu.au/cite/pg_citing/index.html > . Where you have referred to or quoted the work of others you must make appropriate reference to the other person ’ s work. We require you to use either the Harvard or APA referencing system, details of which are available on the USQ Library website at: < http://www.usq.edu.au/library/infoabout/ref_guides/default.htm >. Please take the time to read and understand the Harvard or APA referencing system for Print, Non-Print and Online sources. No referencing is required for the Media Journal except where the Media Journal does not include the actual media item, in which case an Internet reference must be provided. You can reference the study book if you wish as (see an example of CD-ROM referencing in the library Referencing Guides for online sources) and items from the module readings either directly or as if they were chapters in a book (there is an example in the library Referencing Guides). General marking scheme For the Essay and Case Study a quarter of the marks (25%) will be awarded on the basis of a general marking scheme and 75% the marks will be awarded on the basis of the specific requirements of that assessment item. The general marking scheme is as follows: Approach to written content: 5% To what extent have you demonstrated a sophisticated analysis of the issues, developed an accurate and well evidenced argument and linked the concepts and evidence from various sources. It is not sufficient to simply describe something or restate material from references. Your must have a thesis or argument or point of view that you are attempting to support. Criteria for marking standards: The work demonstrates the development of a clear thesis or point of view, is well argued with good justification and credible evidence: 5 The work demonstrates a good approach and is well integrated but lacks a clear point of view: 4 The work is mostly descriptive or restates other material without forming a thesis or point of view: 3 The work is not at all integrated but is haphazard and poorly supported by evidence: less than 3 Rigour of approach: 5% To what extent have you researched the subject and appropriately analysed the strengths and weaknesses of the literature or other information sources. It is not acceptable to simply reference the text book, study book and module readings. You will be expected to locate, read and refer to other reference material from the library or from the Internet. Wherever possible look for quality references from reputable sources and don ’ t rely exclusively on Internet sources. Refer to the library presentations in the  Introduction  for more information. Criteria for marking standards: The work references an appropriate number of relevant quality sources in addition to the study modules, text, readings: 5 The work references some sources in addition to the study modules and/or text and/or readings: 4 The work only references the textbook and/or study modules: 3 The work only references some material relating to the topic: 2 The work does not reference any sources or relies only on personal communications: less than 2 Literary form: 5% To what extent is your writing fluent and sophisticated with no technical, grammatical and spelling errors. We are looking for clarity of expression and argument. We suggest that you get someone else to proof read your work or read it aloud in order to locate errors. Criteria for marking standards: The writing is clear and concise and contains no significant spelling or grammatical errors: 5 The writing is generally clear but with some significant spelling and/or grammar errors: 4 The writing is generally clear but with many significant spelling and/or grammar errors: 3 The writing is difficult to follow, poorly worded etc.: 2 The writing is unclear, disjointed and contains significant spelling and grammar errors: less than 2 Organisation: 5% To what extent is your writing well organised, developing a clear argument. Your points should be well integrated so that your writing flows logically. Use headings and sub-headings as necessary. Introductions and conclusions are normally required. Criteria for marking standards: The work significantly deviates from the required word count: 1 or 2 mark deducted. The work significantly deviates from the required submission format, e.g. front cover, spacing, page numbers, fonts, use of bold/italics, use of quotes: 1 or 2 mark deducted. The work is poorly organised in terms of the sequence of presentation of material, excessive repetition etc.: 1 or 2 marks deducted. The work fails to guide the reader by way of features such as a meaningful title, abstract (where required), introduction, conclusion and sub-headings: 1 or 2 marks deducted. Referencing: 5% To what extent have you accurately referenced all sources in accordance with the Harvard or APA referencing systems. Typical referencing errors include missed references, mismatches between the in-text references and List of References and the List of References not in alphabetical order of author. Criteria for marking standards: There are instances of incorrect formats of in-text citations: deduct 1 or 2 marks. There are instances of incorrect formats of references in the list of references: deduct 1 or 2 marks. A bibliography is provided where a list of references is required or vice versa: deduct 1 mark. References are not listed alphabetically: deduct 1 mark. There are mismatches between in-text citations and references, e.g. missing or not the same author-date: deduct 1 or 2 marks.