Bitmap A bitmap (also known as raster) image consists of pixels (dots) which combine to make up the picture. Each pixel is individually defined and can be modified. Bitmap images cannot be resized without a loss of quality which is in contrast to vector images. Some common bitmap file formats are GIF, JPEG (JPG), PNG, PICT (Macintosh), TIFF, BMP, EPS (can contain both bitmap and vector data).  A  bitmap A bitmap (also known as raster) image consists of pixels (dots) which combine to make up the picture. Each pixel is individually defined and can be modified. Bitmap images cannot be resized without a loss of quality which is in contrast to vector images. Some common bitmap file formats are GIF, JPEG (JPG), PNG, PICT (Macintosh), TIFF, BMP, EPS (can contain both bitmap and vector data).   (also known as raster) image consists of pixels (dots) which combine to make up the picture. Each pixel is individually defined and can be modified.  Bitmap A bitmap (also known as raster) image consists of pixels (dots) which combine to make up the picture. Each pixel is individually defined and can be modified. Bitmap images cannot be resized without a loss of quality which is in contrast to vector images. Some common bitmap file formats are GIF, JPEG (JPG), PNG, PICT (Macintosh), TIFF, BMP, EPS (can contain both bitmap and vector data).   images cannot be resized without a loss of quality which is in contrast to vector images. Some common  bitmap A bitmap (also known as raster) image consists of pixels (dots) which combine to make up the picture. Each pixel is individually defined and can be modified. Bitmap images cannot be resized without a loss of quality which is in contrast to vector images. Some common bitmap file formats are GIF, JPEG (JPG), PNG, PICT (Macintosh), TIFF, BMP, EPS (can contain both bitmap and vector data).   file formats are GIF, JPEG (JPG), PNG, PICT (Macintosh), TIFF, BMP, EPS (can contain both  bitmap A bitmap (also known as raster) image consists of pixels (dots) which combine to make up the picture. Each pixel is individually defined and can be modified. Bitmap images cannot be resized without a loss of quality which is in contrast to vector images. Some common bitmap file formats are GIF, JPEG (JPG), PNG, PICT (Macintosh), TIFF, BMP, EPS (can contain both bitmap and vector data).   and vector data).  Hyperlink A hyperlink (link) is a specific area that, when activated (usually by a mouse click) will take you to information within the same file or to other files. Some other functions a hyperlink may perform are sending email or submitting forms. A hyperlink within text is often coloured and underlined so it is prominent. Graphics may also have a hyperlink applied though it is not always obvious. If a linked graphic has a border it will usually be blue for recognition.  A  hyperlink A hyperlink (link) is a specific area that, when activated (usually by a mouse click) will take you to information within the same file or to other files. Some other functions a hyperlink may perform are sending email or submitting forms. A hyperlink within text is often coloured and underlined so it is prominent. Graphics may also have a hyperlink applied though it is not always obvious. If a linked graphic has a border it will usually be blue for recognition.   (link) is a specific area that, when activated (usually by a mouse click) will take you to information within the same file or to other files. Some other functions a  hyperlink A hyperlink (link) is a specific area that, when activated (usually by a mouse click) will take you to information within the same file or to other files. Some other functions a hyperlink may perform are sending email or submitting forms. A hyperlink within text is often coloured and underlined so it is prominent. Graphics may also have a hyperlink applied though it is not always obvious. If a linked graphic has a border it will usually be blue for recognition.   may perform are sending email or submitting forms. A  hyperlink A hyperlink (link) is a specific area that, when activated (usually by a mouse click) will take you to information within the same file or to other files. Some other functions a hyperlink may perform are sending email or submitting forms. A hyperlink within text is often coloured and underlined so it is prominent. Graphics may also have a hyperlink applied though it is not always obvious. If a linked graphic has a border it will usually be blue for recognition.   within text is often coloured and underlined so it is prominent. Graphics may also have a  hyperlink A hyperlink (link) is a specific area that, when activated (usually by a mouse click) will take you to information within the same file or to other files. Some other functions a hyperlink may perform are sending email or submitting forms. A hyperlink within text is often coloured and underlined so it is prominent. Graphics may also have a hyperlink applied though it is not always obvious. If a linked graphic has a border it will usually be blue for recognition.   applied though it is not always obvious. If a linked graphic has a border it will usually be blue for recognition.  URL U niform  R esource  L ocator  –  A URL displays the address of a file or server on the Internet. A URL can be a FTP, WWW, file, or email address. An example WWW address is  http://www.usq.edu.au . U niform  R esource  L ocator  –  A  URL U niform  R esource  L ocator  –  A URL displays the address of a file or server on the Internet. A URL can be a FTP, WWW, file, or email address. An example WWW address is  http://www.usq.edu.au .  displays the address of a file or server on the Internet. A  URL U niform  R esource  L ocator  –  A URL displays the address of a file or server on the Internet. A URL can be a FTP, WWW, file, or email address. An example WWW address is  http://www.usq.edu.au .  can be a FTP, WWW, file, or email address. An example WWW address is  http://www.usq.edu.au . Manifest The manifest file  ‘ manifest.xml ’  is located in the root level of the package. This file is created by ICE and used to control the content structure and titles. Do not remove the file. The  manifest The manifest file  ‘ manifest.xml ’  is located in the root level of the package. This file is created by ICE and used to control the content structure and titles. Do not remove the file.  file  ‘ manifest The manifest file  ‘ manifest.xml ’  is located in the root level of the package. This file is created by ICE and used to control the content structure and titles. Do not remove the file. .xml ’  is located in the root level of the package. This file is created by ICE and used to control the content structure and titles. Do not remove the file.